Viz (#263)
UBC-DSCI/introduction-to-datascience: viz.Rmd

- Use `ggsave` to save visualizations in `.png` and `.svg` format

## Choosing the visualization
#### *Ask a question, and answer it* {-}

The purpose of a visualization is to answer a question \index{question!visualization} about a data set of interest. So naturally, the first thing to do **before** creating a visualization is to formulate the question about the data you are trying to answer. 
A good visualization will clearly answer your question without distraction; a *great* visualization will suggest even what the question
was itself without additional explanation. Imagine your visualization as part of a poster presentation for a project; even if you aren't standing
at the poster explaining things, an effective visualization will convey your message to the audience.

> Tables are another medium used to answer to questions with data 

Author: We are actually going to remove this section, so will not accept this suggestion.

and communicate the answers.
However, visualizations are usually more effective 

> at communicating the big picture, take home message. 

Author: We are actually going to remove this section, so will not accept this suggestion.

For this reason, data visualizations are widely used 
and the focus of this chapter.
However, when the goal of communication is precision and details, 
tables can then be a better choice.

Recall [the different data analysis questions](index.html#chapter-learning-objectives) from the first chapter. With the visualizations

> we will cover in this chapter, we will be able to answer *only descriptive and exploratory* questions. Be careful not to try to answer any *predictive, inferential, causal or mechanistic*

Author: I am not sure the suggested rewording keeps the intended meaning. I think @trevorcampbell was trying to say to not answer predictive, inferential, causal or mechanistic questions with viz, not just be careful. I will try to reword.

> - **line plots** visualize trends with respect to an independent, ordered quantity (e.g. time)

Reviewer: I think we should make this list align with the order that we introduce them in the chapter
Also should we group the graphs? E.g. put all the scatterplots together etc (co2 data + eruption + canlang)

Author: Addressed the order. I do think we could move `canlang` to being after co2 data. But eruption is not at all about a scatter plot, that is about saving data. So we should leave that one at the end.

Author: Duh, I am silly, the eruption data is there too. Yes, I agree, let's move islands to after canlang!

- **histograms** visualize the distribution of one quantitative variable (i.e., all its possible values and how often they occur) 
- **scatter plots** visualize the relationship between two quantitative variables
- **bar plots** visualize comparisons of amounts

> All types of visualization have their (mis)uses, but three kinds are usually hard to understand or are easily replaced with an oft-better alternative.

Reviewer: Edit: I think if we move the plots you created up to this section (see my comment below) then I don't think we need to move this. Since we can show the pictures then put this paragraph underneath the pictures

from 1959 onwards [@maunadata].
For this book, we are going to focus on the last 40 years of the data set,
1980-2020.

**Question:** \index{question!visualization} 
Does the concentration of atmospheric CO$_{\text{2}}$ change over time, 
and are there any interesting patterns to note?

```{r, echo = FALSE, warning = FALSE, message = FALSE}
# convert year and month to date column
# note: eventually move this to the data script
library(lubridate)
read_csv("data/mauna_loa.csv") |>
  unite(col = "date_measured", year:month, remove = TRUE, sep = "-") |>
  mutate(date_measured = ym(date_measured)) |>
  select(-date_decimal) |>
  filter(ppm > 0, date_measured > date("1980/01/01")) |>
  #filter(ppm > 0, date_measured > interval(ymd("1980/01/01"), ymd("2021-01-01"))) |>
  write_csv("data/mauna_loa_data.csv")
```

To get started, we read in and take a look at the data:

```{r 03-data-co2, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
# mauna loa carbon dioxide data
co2_df <- read_csv("data/mauna_loa_data.csv")
co2_df
```

We see we have two columns available to us; `date_measured` and `ppm`. 
The `date_measured` column holds the date the measurement was taken, 
and is of type `date`.

> The `ppm` columns holds the value of $CO_2$ in parts per million 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ppm` column holds the value of CO$_{\text{2}}$ in parts per million 
```

that was measured on each date, and is type `double`.

> **Note:** `read_csv` was able to parse the `date_measured` column into the
> `date` vector type because it was entered 
> in the international standard date format, 
> called ISO 8601, which lists dates as `year-month-day`.

> > `date` vectors are `double` vectors with special properties that allow 

Reviewer: I think we should move the line : "date vectors are double vectors with special properties that allow them to handle dates correctly. For exam- ple, date type vectors allow functions like ggplot to treat them as numeric dates and not a character vectors, even though they contain non-numeric characters (e.g., - in the date_measured column in the co2_df data frame). " to the beginning of this note and then say "read_csv was able to parse..."

> them to handle dates correctly.
> For example, `date` type vectors allow functions like `ggplot` 

> > to treat them as numeric dates and not a character vectors, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> to treat them as numeric dates and not character vectors, 
```

> even though they contain non-numeric characters 

> > (e.g., `-` in the `date_measured` column in the `co2_df` data frame).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> (e.g., the dash (`-`) in the `date_measured` column in the `co2_df` data frame).
```
in the pdf its hard to see the "-" character

> > This means R it will not accidentally plot the dates in the wrong order 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This means R will not accidentally plot the dates in the wrong order 
```

> (i.e., not alphanumerically as would happen if it was a character vector). 

> > An in depth study of dates and times is beyond the scope of the book, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> An in-depth study of dates and times is beyond the scope of the book, 
```

> but we invite readers who are interested to learn more 
> to see the Dates and times chapter of R for Data Science [@wickham2016r]

> > (linked to in our Additional Resources section at the end of this chapter).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> (linked in our additional resources section at the end of this chapter).
```
are we doing lower case or upper case "Additional Resources"? I think Trevor corrected mine to lower case on the last edit

Reviewer 2: "additional resources section"

"Section X"

are current style

Since we are investigating a relationship between two variables 
(CO$_{\text{2}}$ concentration and date), 
a scatter plot is a good place to start. 
Scatter plots show the data as individual points with `x` (horizontal axis) 
and `y` (vertical axis) coordinates.
An example of a scatter plot is shown in Figure \@ref(fig:scatter-plot-sketch).

> ```{r scatter-plot-sketch, echo = FALSE, fig.width = 3.25, fig.height = 3, fig.align = 'center', fig.cap = "Example of a scatter plot."}

Reviewer: I really like these plots you created and I think these are so great for explaining the basic plots types! I think we should move all of these plots up to section 4.3: Choosing the visualization. Right after we introduce the list of plots we can give a visual representation of the plots with these figures you've created. It makes the list in 4.3 less abstract and also allows people to compare the visualizations. It also makes these sections less distracting so we can focus only on the question  we want to answer about the data + iterating as opposed to learning what a scatterplot is *and* trying to answer the question

co2_scatter <- ggplot(co2_df, aes(x = date_measured, y = ppm)) +
  geom_point()
co2_scatter
```

Certainly, the visualization in Figure \@ref(fig:03-data-co2-scatter) shows a clear upward trend in the atmospheric concentration of CO$_{\text{2}}$ over time.
This plot answers the first part of our question in the affirmative, but that appears to be the only conclusion one can make from the scatter visualization. 
However, since time is an ordered quantity, we can try using a line plot instead using the `geom_line` function. Line plots require
that their `x` coordinate orders the data, and connect the sequence of `x` and `y` coordinates with line segments. 
An example of a line plot is shown in Figure \@ref(fig:line-plot-sketch).

```{r line-plot-sketch, echo = FALSE, fig.width = 3.25, fig.height = 3, fig.align = 'center', fig.cap = "Example of a line plot."}
set.seed(1)
line_data <- tibble(x = seq(0.5, 10, by = 1) + rnorm(10, 1, 0.5),
                       y = seq(0.5, 10, by = 1) + rnorm(10, 1, 0.1))

ggplot(line_data, aes(x = x, y = y)) +
  geom_line() +
  xlim(c(0, 12)) +
  ylim(c(0, 12)) +
  theme_classic()
```

> Let's now try tp visualize the `co2_df` as a line plot 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's now try to visualize the `co2_df` as a line plot 
```

\index{ggplot!xlab,ylab}
\index{ggplot!theme}

```{r 03-data-co2-line-2, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE, fig.cap = "Line plot of atmospheric concentration of CO$_{2}$ over time with clearer axes and labels"}
co2_line <- ggplot(co2_df, aes(x = date_measured, y = ppm)) +
  geom_line() +
  xlab("Year") +
  ylab("Atmospheric CO2 (ppm)") +
  theme(text = element_text(size = 16))
co2_line
```

> > **Note:** 

Reviewer: In the pdf this note is misplaced, it appears under the figure so its a little confusing -- this is probably something we need to do in a larger formatting pass (placement of figures and text), but noting it here just in case
<img width="516" alt="Screen Shot 2021-09-30 at 9 30 03 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3838091/135565472-ef868173-78a2-4a6b-a8e1-bcf0d6b2663a.png">

> The `theme` function is quite complex and has many arguments 
> that can be specified to control many non-data aspects of a visualization.
> An in-depth discussion of the `theme` function is beyond the scope of this book,
> however we invite readers who are interested to learn more 
> to read the `theme` function documentation

> > (linked to in our Additional Resources section at the end of this chapter).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> (linked to in our additional resources section at the end of this chapter).
```

In particular, here, we will use the `xlim` function to zoom in 
on just five years of data (say, 1990-1995).
`xlim` takes a vector of length two 
to specify the upper and lower bounds to limit the axis. 
We can create that using the `c` function.
Note that it is important that the vector given to `xlim` must be of the same
type as the data that is mapped to that axis. 
Here, we have a mapped a date to the x-axis, 
and so we need to use the `date` function 
(from the `tidyverse` `lubridate` R package) 
to convert the character strings we provide to `c` to `date` vectors.

> **Note:** 
> `lubridate` is a package that is installed by the `tidyverse` metapackage,
> but is not loaded by it. 
> Hence we need to load it separately in the code below.

```{r 03-data-co2-line-3, warning = FALSE, message = FALSE, fig.cap = "Line plot of atmospheric concentration of CO$_{2}$ from 1990 to 1995 only"}
library(lubridate)

co2_line <- ggplot(co2_df, aes(x = date_measured, y = ppm)) +
  geom_line() +
  xlab("Year") +
  ylab("Atmospheric CO2 (ppm)") +
  xlim(c(date("1990-01-01"), date("1994-12-01"))) +
  theme(text = element_text(size = 16))
co2_line
```

> Interesting! It seems that each year, the atmospheric CO$_{\text{2}}$ increases until it reaches its peak somewhere around April, decreases until around late September, 

Author: I changed it so we only look at 4 years, then we get a grid line at 6 months (June) so it's a bit easier to follow now.

change the font, adjust the point size, and do other related things.

### The island landmass data set with bar plot
The `islands.csv` data set \index{Island landmasses} contains a list of Earth's landmasses as well as their area (in thousands of square miles) [@islandsdata]. 

**Question:** \index{question!visualization} Are the continents (North / South America, Africa, Europe, Asia, Australia, Antarctica) Earth's seven largest landmasses? If so, what are the next few largest landmasses after those?

```{r, echo = FALSE, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE}
islands_df <- read_csv("data/islands.csv")
continents <- c("Africa", "Antarctica", "Asia", "Australia", 
                "Europe", "North America", "South America")
islands_df <- mutate(islands_df, 
                     landmass_type = ifelse(landmass %in% continents, "Continent", "Other"))
write_csv(islands_df, "data/islands.csv")
```

```{r 03-data-islands, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
# islands data
islands_df <- read_csv("data/islands.csv")
islands_df
```

Here, we have a data frame of Earth's landmasses, 
and are trying to compare their sizes. 
The right type of visualization to answer this question is a bar plot. 

> A bar plot uses a rectangle to encode the value a summary statistic 

Author: addressed.

islands_bar
```

The plot in Figure \@ref(fig:03-data-islands-bar-2) is definitely clearer now, 
and allows us to answer our question 
("are the top 7 largest landmasses continents?") in the affirmative. 
But the question could be made clearer from the plot 
by organizing the bars not by alphabetical order
but by size, and to colour them based on whether they are a continent. 
The data for this is stored in the `landmass_type` column. 
To use this to colour the bars, 
we add the `fill` argument to the aesthetic mapping 
and set it to `landmass_type`. 

To organize the landmasses by their `size` variable, 
we will use the `tidyverse` `fct_reorder` function
in the aesthetic mapping to organize the landmasses by their `size` variable.

> The first argument passed to `fct_reorder` is the factor columns's name, 

Author: addressed.

> whose level's we would like to reorder (here `landmass`). 

Author: addressed.

The second argument passed is the column name 
that holds the values we would like to use to do the ordering (here `size`).
`fct_reorder` orders by that column in ascending order by default, 
but this can be changed to sorting in descending order 
by setting  `.desc = TRUE`.

> We do this here so that the largest bar will closet to the axis line,

Author: fixed

> We do this here so that the largest bar will closet to the axis line,

Reviewer: My edit is wrong, its still missing the word "be": "the largest bar will **be** closest"

> as that is more visually appealing.

Author: fixed

To label the x and y axes, we shift from using `xlab` and `ylab`, 
to specifying these within the `labs` function. 
We do this here because we would also like to change the legend label.
The default label is the column name of the column being mapped to `fill`,

> however `landmass_type` is not very human readable or visually pleasing.

Author: fixed

islands_bar <- ggplot(islands_top12, 
                      aes(x = size,
                          y = fct_reorder(landmass, size, .desc = TRUE), 
                          fill = landmass_type)) +
  geom_bar(stat = "identity") +
  labs(x = "Size (1000 square mi)", y = "Landmass",  fill = "Type") +
  theme(text = element_text(size = 16))
islands_bar
```

The plot in Figure \@ref(fig:03-data-islands-bar-4) is now a very effective visualization for answering our original questions. Landmasses are organized by their size,
and continents are coloured differently than other landmasses, making it quite clear that continents are the largest seven landmasses.

### The Old Faithful eruption/waiting time data set with scatter plots
The `faithful` data set \index{Old Faithful} contains measurements 
of the waiting time between eruptions 
and the subsequent eruption duration (in minutes). 
The `faithful` data set is available in base R as a data frame,
so it does not need to be loaded.
We convert it to a tibble to take advantage of the nicer print output 
these specialized data frames provide.

> **Question:** \index{question!visualization} Is there a relationship between the waiting time before an eruption to the duration of the eruption? 

Author: fixed

```{r 03-data-faithful, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
# old faithful eruption time / wait time data
faithful <- as_tibble(faithful)
faithful
```

> 

Author: I think what is trying to be said is that they do not have a natural order - like time does.

> 

Author: More formally, the difference is that the time variable is the CO2 data is not independent, whereas here both variables are are.

> 

Author: @leem44 @trevorcampbell I have changed it to this to make it clearer (I want to avoid the term independent, as we have not introduced it, nor do we elsewhere in the book):

```
Here again, we investigate the relationship between two quantitative variables 
(waiting time and eruption time). 
But if you look at the output of the data frame, 
you'll notice that unlike time in the Mauna Loa CO$_{\text{2}}$ data set,
neither of the variables here have a natural order to them.
So, in this case, let's start again with a scatter plot:
```

> ```{r 03-mother-tongue-vs-most-at-home-labs, fig.width=5.75, fig.height=5, warning=FALSE, fig.cap = "Scatter plot of number of Canadians reporting a language as their mother tongue vs the primary language at home with x and y labels"}

Author: It is currently rendering in the html, will check again in the PDF when I do the global formatting pass.

To answer our question, we will need to adjust the scale of the x and y axes so that they are on a log scale. Doing this can help make patterns in the data more interpretable.

> 

Author: done

```{r 03-mother-tongue-vs-most-at-home-scale, fig.width=5.75, fig.height=5, warning=FALSE, fig.cap = "Scatter plot of number of Canadians reporting a language as their mother tongue vs the primary language at home with log adjusted x and y axes"}
library(scales)

ggplot(can_lang, aes(x = most_at_home, y = mother_tongue)) +
  geom_point() +
  labs(x = "Language spoken most at home \n (number of Canadian residents)",
       y = "Mother tongue \n (number of Canadian residents)") +
  scale_x_log10(labels = comma) +
  scale_y_log10(labels = comma)
```
> Here we are adjusting the scale of the x and y axes on a $log$ scale with base 10. 

> > Notice that $log_{10}(10) = 1$, $log_{10}(100) = 2$, and $log_{10}(1000) = 3$. 

Author: @leem44 - I tried this, for relationship direction, strength and linearity. What do you think?

```
When we see two variables moving in the same direction 
(as x increases, y increases), we call this a *positive relationship*.
If instead, we saw two variables moving in the opposite direction 
(as x increases, y decreases), we would call this a *negative relationship*.
Another possibility here, is to observe no relationship. 
This is when y neither nor decreases across the values of x.
Because the points are fairly close together, 
we can say that the relationship is strong. 
If instead, we saw that the points were spread much further apart, 
we would say that the relationship was weak.
Because drawing a straight line through these points 
would fit the pattern we observe quite well, we say that it's linear.
If instead, drawing a straight line through these points 
did not fit the observed pattern of the data, 
we would say that it is non-linear.
```

> > Notice that $log_{10}(10) = 1$, $log_{10}(100) = 2$, and $log_{10}(1000) = 3$. 

Author: I added the word context here and refer to chapter 3 where we discuss this in more detail.

> > Notice that $log_{10}(10) = 1$, $log_{10}(100) = 2$, and $log_{10}(1000) = 3$. 

Reviewer: missing word: This is when y neither **increases** nor decreases...
I think we should add to the sentence: "Because the points in our graph are fairly close together," -- since we are going from talking about the general case to this specific case

```{r 03-mother-tongue-vs-most-at-home-scale-props, fig.width=5.75, fig.height=5, warning=FALSE, fig.cap = "Scatter plot of percentage of Canadians reporting a language as their mother tongue vs the primary language at home"}
ggplot(can_lang, aes(x = most_at_home_percent, y = mother_tongue_percent)) +
  geom_point() +

>   labs(x = "Language spoken most at home \n (number of Canadian residents)",

Author: fixed

       y = "Mother tongue \n (number of Canadian residents)") +
  scale_x_log10(labels = comma) +
  scale_y_log10(labels = comma)
```

> Now we'll move onto the second part of our exploratory data analysis question: when considering the relationship between the number of people who have a language as their mother tongue and the number of people who speak that language at home, is there a pattern in the strength of this relationship in the higher-level language categories (Official languages, Aboriginal languages, or non-official and non-Aboriginal languages)? One common way to explore this is to colour the data points on the scatter plot we have already created by group. For example, given that we have the higher-level language category for each language recorded in the 2016 Canadian census, we can colour the points in our previous 

Author: fixed

```{r 03-scatter-colour-by-category, fig.width=7.75, fig.height=4, warning=FALSE,  fig.cap = "Scatter plot of percentage of Canadians reporting a language as their mother tongue vs the primary language at home coloured by language category"}
ggplot(can_lang, aes(x = most_at_home_percent, y = mother_tongue_percent, color = category)) +
  geom_point() +
  labs(x = "Language spoken most at home \n (number of Canadian residents)",
       y = "Mother tongue \n (number of Canadian residents)") +
  scale_x_log10(labels = comma) +
  scale_y_log10(labels = comma)
```

In Figure \@ref(fig:03-scatter-colour-by-category), the points are coloured with the default `ggplot2` colour palette. But what if you want to use different colours? In R, one package that provides alternative colour palettes \index{color palette} is `RColorBrewer` [@RColorBrewer]. You can visualize the list of colour palettes that `RColorBrewer` has to offer with the `display.brewer.all` function. You can also print a list of colour blind friendly palettes by adding `colorblindFriendly = TRUE` to the function.

```{r}
library(RColorBrewer)

> display.brewer.all(colorblindFriendly = TRUE)

Author: done

```

From the output above, we can choose the colour palette we want to use in our plot. 
To change the colour palette, we add the `scale_colour_brewer` layer indicating the palette we want to use. 

```{r scatter-colour-by-category-palette, fig.width=7.75, fig.height=4, warning=FALSE,  fig.cap = "Scatter plot of percentage of Canadians reporting a language as their mother tongue vs the primary language at home coloured by language category with colour blind friendly colours"}
ggplot(can_lang, aes(x = most_at_home_percent, y = mother_tongue_percent, color = category)) +
  geom_point() +

>   labs(x = "Language spoken most at home \n (number of Canadian residents)",

Author: done

       y = "Mother tongue \n (number of Canadian residents)") +
  scale_x_log10(labels = comma) +
  scale_y_log10(labels = comma) +
  scale_color_brewer(palette = "RdYlBu")
```

> You can use this [color blindness simulator](https://www.color-blindness.com/coblis-color-blindness-simulator/) \index{color palette!color blindness simulator} to check if your visualizations are colour blind friendly.

Author: Will deal with in formatting pass.

Additionally, the `ggthemes` R package also has a [color blind friendly color pallete](https://jrnold.github.io/ggthemes/reference/colorblind.html).

From the visualization in Figure \@ref(fig:scatter-colour-by-category-palette), we can now clearly see that not just a lot, but that the majority of Canadians reported one of the official languages as their mother tongue and as the language they speak most often at home. 

> 

Author: fixed

  shape = category

> )) + # map categories to different shapes

Author: fixed

  geom_point(alpha = 0.6) + # set the transparency of the points
  labs(x = "Language spoken most at home \n (number of Canadian residents)",

>        y = "Mother tongue \n (number of Canadian residents)") +

Author: done

  scale_x_log10(labels = comma) +
  scale_y_log10(labels = comma) + 
  scale_color_brewer(palette = "RdYlBu")
```

### The Michelson speed of light data set with histograms
The `morley` data set \index{Michelson speed of light} 
contains measurements of the speed of light 
collected in experiments performed in 1879.
Five experiments were performed, 

> and in each experiment 20 runs were performed - 

Author: done

so it does not need to be loaded.
We convert it to a tibble to take advantage of the nicer print output 
these specialized data frames provide.
An additional thing to know about this data set, 
is that because the speed of light is a very large number 
(the true value is 299,792.458 km/sec) the data is coded
to be the measured speed of light minus 299,000.
Doing this allows us to explore the variability in the measurements 
collected on the speed of light. 
If we were to focus on the entire large number, 
these smaller differences would become not noticeable, 
even though in this case they are quite important. 

**Question:** \index{question!visualization} Given what we know now about the speed of 
light (299,792.458 kilometres per second), how accurate were each of the experiments?

```{r 03-data-morley, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
# michelson morley experimental data
morley <- as_tibble(morley)
morley
```

In this experimental data, Michelson was trying to measure just a single quantitative number (the speed of light). The data set
contains many measurements of this single quantity. To tell how accurate the experiments were, we need to visualize the 

> distribution of the measurements (i.e., all their possible values and how often each occurs). We can do this using a *histogram*. A histogram \index{ggplot!histogram} helps us visualize how a 

Author: We do have it at the beginning of the chapter. But good idea adding it to the index.

> particular variable is distributed in a data set by separating the data into bins, and then using vertical bars 

Author: But we can create histograms for non-quantitative data, so I would rather leave it as "particular".

morley_hist
```

Figure \@ref(fig:03-data-morley-hist) is a great start. 
However, 
we cannot tell how accurate the measurements are using this visualization 
unless we can see what the true value is.
In order to visualize the true speed of light, 
we will add a vertical line with the `geom_vline` function 
\index{ggplot!geom\_vline}.
To draw a vertical line with `geom_vline`, 
we need to specify where on the x-axis the line should be drawn. 
We can do this by setting the `xintercept` argument. 
Here we set it to the true value of light speed minus 299, 000 (so it is coded the same way as the measurements in the `morley` data frame): 792.458. 
We also would like to fine tune this vertical line, 

> styling it so that is dashed and 1 point in thickness. 

Author: I equivocated it to what it is in mm. And added it is a measurement unit we commonly also use with font.

> morley_hist

Reviewer: do we explain `position = "identity"` -- I think we started using it here, but don't think it's explained... I think we should remove it here since it doesn't do anything in this particular line. 
But we should explain it below when the colours are introduced below

Author: We explain it in the landmass example. We don't even really need it here at all... I don't think...

Author: OH WAIT - that is stat = "identity" in the landmass example... Let me add the explanation for `position = "identity" ` here.

Author: And we kind of need it in the one plot where we try to map the colours and fail - because otherwise, the shape changes and that is confusing.

```

> Wait a second; the histogram is still all the same colour! What is going on here? If we look at the printed `morley` data, the column `Expt` is an integer (we see the label `<int>` underneath the `Expt` column name). But we want to treat it as a categorical variable.  To fix this issue we can write `as_factor(Expt)` in the `fill` aesthetic mapping. Recall that factors are a special categorical type of variable in R that are often used for class label data. By writing `as_factor(Expt)` we are ensuring that R will treat this variable as a factor and the colour will be mapped discretely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wait a second; the histogram is still all the same colour! What is going on here? If we look at the printed `morley` data, the column `Expt` is an integer (we see the label `<int>` underneath the `Expt` column name). But we want to treat it as a categorical variable.  To fix this issue, we can write `as_factor(Expt)` in the `fill` aesthetic mapping. Recall that factors are a special categorical type of variable in R that are often used for class label data. By writing `as_factor(Expt)` we are ensuring that R will treat this variable as a factor, and the colour will be mapped discretely.
```

of the most incorrect measurements), it isn't the clearest way to convey our message and answer the question. Let's try a different strategy of 
creating multiple separate histograms on top of one another. 

In order to create a plot in `ggplot2` 
that has multiple subplots arranged in a grid, 
we use the `facet_grid` function.
The argument to `facet_grid` specifies the variable(s) used to split the plot 
into subplots, and how to split them (i.e., into rows or columns).
If the plot is to be split horizontally, into rows, 
then the `rows` argument is used.
If the plot is to be split vertically, into columns, 
then the `columns` argument is used.
Both the `rows` and `columns` argument take the column names to split the data 
on when creating the subplots. 
One key thing is that the column names must be surrounded by the `vars` function.

> This function allows the column names to be correctly evaluated 

Reviewer: could we explain the `vars` function a bit more here

Author: We can't really without going down a deep rabbit hole about unquoted column names in R, and how to program with them... 

For example, here are the docs for `vars`:
Just like `aes()`, `vars()` is a quoting function that takes inputs to be evaluated in the context of a dataset. 

To explain that we need to explain why R is weird by using unquoted column names, and what it means to evaluate something in the context of a dataset - which means explaining the global environment... and on...

in the context of the data frame.
\index{ggplot!facet\_grid}

```{r 03-data-morley-hist-4, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE, fig.height = 7, fig.cap = "Histogram of Michelson's speed of light data split vertically by experiment"}
morley_hist <- ggplot(morley, aes(x = Speed, fill = as_factor(Expt))) +
  geom_histogram(position = "identity") +
  facet_grid(rows = vars(Expt)) +
  geom_vline(xintercept = 792.458, linetype = "dashed", size = 1.0)
morley_hist

> ```

Reviewer: I think after the line: "makes it quite clear how accurate the different experiments were with respect to one another. "
I think it would help the reader to provide a quick interpretation of the plot e.g. "We can experiment 1 had the highest spread/variability (whatever term we have used in the past) and experiment 6 blah etc."

> To answer this question, we'll use the `mutate` function to transform our data into a relative measure of accuracy rather than absolute measurements:

Reviewer: in the line above: "it is hard to get a sense for just" -- change "for" to "of"

admirable job given the technology available at the time.

#### Choosing a binwidth for histograms {-}

When you create a histogram in R, the default number of bins used is 30.
Is this the number you should always use? The answer here is no.
The right number of bins really depends on 
what makes sense for the problem you're working on.
It should help you answer the question you are asking.
Setting the number of bins is possible 
via the `bins` argument in `geom_histogram`, 
however the number of bins depends on both the question you are asking 
as well as the number of observations you have in your data.
Instead of choosing the number of bins, 
we suggest you choose the bin width that makes sense for your problem.
This can be set via the `binwidth` argument in `geom_histogram`.

Choosing the correct bin width for your problem 
is something that commonly takes iteration.
It's usually a good idea to try out several bin widths.
Let's do that here for the histogram we have been working on.

> In Figure \@ref(fig:03-data-morley-hist-binwidth)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Figure \@ref(fig:03-data-morley-hist-binwidth),
```

we compare the default number of bins with three histograms where we set the 
`binwidth` in `geom_histogram` to 0.001, 0.01 and 0.1.

> We can see that in this case, both the default number of bins 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, we can see that both the default number of bins
```

  geom_histogram(position = "identity", binwidth = 0.01) +
  facet_grid(rows = vars(Expt)) +
  geom_vline(xintercept = 0, linetype = "dashed", size = 1.0) +
  labs(x = "Relative Accuracy (%)", y = "# Measurements", fill = "Experiment ID") +
  theme(legend.position = "none") +
  ggtitle("binwidth = 0.01")

morley_hist_small <- ggplot(morley_rel, aes(x = relative_accuracy, fill = as_factor(Expt))) +
  geom_histogram(position = "identity", binwidth = 0.001) +
  facet_grid(rows = vars(Expt)) +
  geom_vline(xintercept = 0, linetype = "dashed", size = 1.0) +
  labs(x = "Relative Accuracy (%)", y = "# Measurements", fill = "Experiment ID") +
  theme(legend.position = "none") +
  ggtitle("binwidth = 0.001")

plot_grid(morley_hist_default, 
          morley_hist_small, 
          morley_hist_med, 
          morley_hist_big, 
          ncol = 2)
```

#### Adding layers to a `ggplot` plot object {-}

What if we want to add onto a `ggplot` plot object later in our analysis?
Do we need to copy and paste the code we wrote previously 
and then add on our new layers after that? No! 
If we stored our `ggplot` plot as a named object

> using the assignment symbol (`<-`) then we can call that object 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the assignment symbol (`<-`), we can call it 
```

> and add on to it using the `+` operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and add to it using the `+` operator.
```

For example, if we wanted to add a title to the last plot we created, 
named `morley_rel`, we can call the name of that plot, then the `+` operator, 
and then add our code to create a title for the plot 
(using the `ggtitle` function):

```{r 03-data-morley-hist-addlayer, warning = FALSE, message = FALSE, fig.height = 7, fig.cap = "Histogram of relative accuracy split vertically by experiment with a descriptive title highlighting the take home message of the visualization."}
morley_hist_title <- morley_hist +
  ggtitle("Morley's speed of light experiments \n were accurate to about 0.05%")
morley_hist_title
```

> **Note:** 
> Good data visualizations titles clearly communicate 
> the take home message to the audience. 
> Typically, 
> that is the answer to the question you posed before making the visualization.

## Explaining the visualization
#### *Tell a story* {-}

Typically, your visualization will not be shown entirely on its own, but rather it will be part of a larger presentation.

> Further, visualizations can provide supporting information for any aspect of a presentation, from opening to conclusion.

Reviewer: space between colon and "story" in this line: "Regardless of where it appears, a good way to discuss your visualization is as a story :"

> Further, visualizations can provide supporting information for any aspect of a presentation, from opening to conclusion.

Reviewer: below it says "distributions (scatters, histograms)" -- shouldn't this just be "distributions (histograms)"

Author: Rug plots, and 1D scatters can be useful for 1D distributions in some scenarios:

Rug plot:
<img width="424" alt="Screen Shot 2021-10-01 at 11 33 19 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6865016/135706300-77e1d780-6626-46e4-8e9b-409eb462da72.png">

1D scatter with 3 groups:
<img width="481" alt="Screen Shot 2021-10-01 at 11 33 49 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6865016/135706305-c430ce93-1107-4d65-bd25-fdcb1aee66cd.png">

Author: I guess we don't really teach those here, so if you feel strongly, we can remove.

Below are two examples of how one might take these four steps in describing the example visualizations that appeared earlier in this chapter.
Each of the steps is denoted by its numeral in parentheses, e.g. (3).

**Mauna Loa Atmospheric CO$_{\text{2}}$ Measurements:** (1) \index{Mauna Loa CO2} Many current forms of energy generation and conversion---from automotive engines to natural gas power plants---rely on burning
fossil fuels and produce greenhouse gases, typically primarily carbon dioxide (CO$_{\text{2}}$), as a byproduct. Too much of these gases in the Earth's atmosphere will cause it to trap
more heat from the sun, leading to global warming. (2) In order to assess how quickly the atmospheric concentration of CO$_{\text{2}}$ is increasing over time, we (3) used a data set from

> the Mauna Loa observatory from Hawaii, consisting of CO$_{\text{2}}$ measurements from 1959 to the present. We plotted the measured concentration of CO$_{\text{2}}$ (on the vertical axis) over time

Reviewer: this says we used measurements from 1959 to present but I think this was changed right? 1980s -2020 or something?

ggsave("img/faithful_plot.png", faithful_plot)
ggsave("img/faithful_plot.jpg", faithful_plot)
ggsave("img/faithful_plot.bmp", faithful_plot)
ggsave("img/faithful_plot.tiff", faithful_plot)
ggsave("img/faithful_plot.svg", faithful_plot)
```

```{r, filesizes, echo = FALSE}
file_sizes <- tibble(`Image type` = c("Bitmap / Raster", 
                        "Bitmap / Raster", 
                        "Bitmap / Raster", 
                        "Bitmap / Raster",
                        "Vector / Scalable Graphics"),
       `File type` = c("PNG", "JPG", "BMP", "TIFF", "SVG"),
       `Image size` = c(paste(round(file.info("img/faithful_plot.png")["size"] / 1000000, 2), "MB"),
                        paste(round(file.info("img/faithful_plot.jpg")["size"] / 1000000, 2), "MB"),
                        paste(round(file.info("img/faithful_plot.bmp")["size"] / 1000000, 2), "MB"),
                        paste(round(file.info("img/faithful_plot.tiff")["size"] / 1000000, 2), "MB"),
                        paste(round(file.info("img/faithful_plot.svg")["size"] / 1000000, 2), "MB")))
kable(file_sizes,
      caption = "File sizes of `faithful_plot` when saved as different file formats.")
```

> The different file types are not only different in their properties 

Reviewer: formatting in this section (writing for the rest of the chapter centered rather than left aligned and the caption formatting displays in the pdf) 
<img width="602" alt="Screen Shot 2021-10-01 at 1 31 48 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3838091/135682882-53efbbd4-b1bf-48cd-88b7-fd01e657a4a9.png">

Author: OK, this is weird and should not happen, I will check tables in the formatting pass.

(outlined above), but also in their file sizes (Table \@ref(tab:filesizes)).
Wow, that's quite a difference! Notice that for such a simple plot with few
graphical elements (points), the vector graphics format (SVG) is over 100 times
smaller than the uncompressed raster images (BMP, TIFF). Also, note that the
JPG format is twice as large as the PNG format since the JPG compression
algorithm is designed for natural images (not plots). 

> Below, we also show what

Reviewer: images are stacked in the pdf instead of side by side -- they also look the same... 
<img width="586" alt="Screen Shot 2021-10-01 at 1 33 23 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3838091/135683021-85e16495-4cd3-4d77-ab11-fc715fe1a220.png">

Author: Yep, aware and will fix when we attack the PDF

> - The [`ggplot2` page on the tidyverse website](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org) is where you should look if you want to learn more about the functions in this chapter, the full set of arguments you can use, and other related functions. The site also provides a very nice cheat sheet that summarizes many of the data wrangling functions from this chapter.

Reviewer: should provide the links here -- I guess this will be a part of the formatting pass

Author: yep
